________________

MEGHA DÚTA, OR
JUU HAPATELAquitgang स्निग्धच्छायातरुषु वसतिं रामगिर्याश्रमेषु ॥१॥
Spoiled of his glories, severed from his wife, A banished Yaksha passed his lonely life : Doomed, by his lord's stern sentence, to sustain Twelve tedious months of solitude and pain.
ANNOTATIONS. Janaka, until the latter was carried off by the demon or giant Rávana: see the Ramayana. The performance of her ablutions in the springs of the mountain is here stated to have rendered their water the object of religious veneration.
Verse 4. A Yaksha] Is a demigod, of which there exists a Gana or class. They have few peculiar attributes, and are regarded only as the companions or attendants of Kuvera, the god of wealth. The word is derived from qa to worship'; either, because they minister to Kuvera, are reverenced themselves by men, or are beloved by the Apsaras, the courtezans of Indra's heaven. They have, however, their own female companions, or wives; as appears by the poem. One writer, cited and censured by a Commentator on the Amara Kosha, derives the name from U to eat,' because he says they devour children. Occasionally, indeed, the Yakshas appear as imps of evil; but, in general, their character is perfectly inoffensive.
Verse 5.] The lord of the Yakshas is Kuvera, who, in Hindu mythology, performs the functions of the Grecian Plutus. He is the god of wealth, and master of nine inestimable treasures. His capital is situated on mount Kailasa, and inhabited by Yakshas, Kinnaras, and other inferior deities. He has a variety of appellations alluding to these circumstances, but is most commonly designated by the one here employed. The term is expressive of his deformity, being derived from vile,' and ac 'body'; and he is described as having three legs, and but eight teeth. No images of him occur, nor is any particular worship paid to him; and in these respects there is a considerable analogy between him and his Grecian parallel. Plutus is described as blind, malignant, and cowardly; and seems to have received but very slender homage from Greek or Roman devotion. The term "sentence," here used, is, more literally,
curse. The text also states that it was incurred by a neglect of duty, the Yaksha having been heedless in his office, Elfyrai tha:. According to the Commentators, he was the warder of the gate of Kuvera's garden; and, quitting his post for a season, allowed Indra's elephant to commit a trespass, and trample down the flower-beds.