________________

MEGHA DÚTA, OR
जातं वंशे भुवनविदिते पुष्करावर्तकानां जानामि त्वा प्रकृतिपुरुष कामरूपं मघोनः ॥
Hail, friend of Indra, counsellor divine, Illustrious offspring of a glorious line!
38
ANNOTATIONS. offering a libation to a venerable person, or to a deity; although it also implies the oblation itself, otherwise denominated you. This oblation, of which water forms the basis, is presented in a cup, a shell, or any metallic oblong and boat-shaped vessel. The vessel in the spoken dialects is called by a similar name 3,1 Argha. Indeed, Mr. Wilford states, Asiatic Researches, iï. 361, and viï. 274, that Argha, in Sanskrit, means 'a boat;' whence he deduces the ship Argo, &c.; and whence, with Mr. Bryant's assistance, we may deduce the Ark of Scripture. The Sanskrit word, however, has not been found in any of the vocabularies of the language, with the import Mr. Wilford has assigned to it.
The oblation called Argha or Arghya, generally considered, comprises eight articles, thus enumerated :
आपः क्षोर कुशामाणि दधि सर्पिश्च तण्डुलाः ।
यवाः सिद्धार्थकं चैव अष्टाङ्गार्य प्रकीर्तितम् ॥ “The eight-fold Arghya is formed of water, milk, the points of Kuća-grass, curds, clarified " butter, rice, barley, and white mustard.” In the Achára Darsa of Srídatta, in a passage quoted from the Déví Puráňa, they are stated somewhat differently; thus,
रक्तविस्वाक्षतैः पुष्पैदेधिदूळाकुशैस्तिलैः ।
सामान्यः सबैदेवानामों यं परिकीर्तितः ॥ "The general Argha, proper for any of the gods, consists of saffron, the Bel, unbroken grain, " flowers, curds, Dúrba-grass, Kuśa-grass, and Sesamum.” Water is not mentioned here, being considered as the vehicle of the whole: the same author adds, that should any of these not be procurable, they may be supplied by the imagination :
अभावे दधिदूवादेमीनसं वा प्रकल्पयेत् ॥ Besides the Argha common to all the gods, there are peculiar ones for separate deities: thus we find a few new-blown buds are sufficient for a cloud; and in the Sarvaswa Purana, the Argha for the Sun is thus enumerated,
चन्दनोदकसम्मिश्रं दत्वाध्ये कुसुमं खेः ॥ " Having presented an Arghya to the Sun, of water mixed with sandal, and flowers :” and an oblation to the same planet, as given by Mr. Colebrooke, Asiatic Researches, ch. v. 357, is said to
consist