________________

CLOUD MESSENGER.
तेनार्थित्वं त्वयि विधिवशादरबन्धुर्गतो म्हं
Wearer of shapes at will; thy worth I know, And bold entrust thee with my fated woe :
ANNOTATIONS. consist of Tila, flowers, barley, water and red sanders. Water alone is also sufficient to constitute the A.gha. In the articles which form the Argha of the Hindus, as well as in the mode of presentation, that of pouring it out, or libating, we trace its analogy with the ancient libation. Of course, wine could never enter into Hindu offerings of this kind; but we find that the Greeks had their vnpárta lepà or sober sacrifices,' from which wine was excluded. These were of four kinds: tà idpóomovda, "libations of water,' tà períortovda of honey,' tà yalaktóomovda of milk,' and Tà éralóo trovda 'of oil;' which liquors were sometimes mixed with one another. According to Porphyry, most of the libations in the primitive times were vnpáncol. See Potter's Antiquities of Greece. We have here, then, three of the four fluid substances of an Argha, as first enumerated above, if we may compare the clarified butter with the oil: honey would, of course, be omitted on the same account as wine, being a prohibited article in Hindu law. With respect to the solid parts of the offering, a reference to the same authority will shew that they consisted of green herbs, grains, fruits, flowers, and frankincense; analogous to the grasses, rice, barley, flowers, sandal, &c. of the Sanskrit formulæ.
Verse 37. Hail, friend of Indra!] Indra is the sovereign deity of Swarga, or the Hindu Olympus. The cloud is here considered as his friend or counsellor, in allusion to his functions as regent of the atmosphere, where he appears in the character of the Jupiter Tonans, or Neden nyepéta Zeús. The appellative fun, used in the original, is considered, by Etymologists, as irregularly derived from the passive form of HE, to adore,' to worship.'
Verse 38. Illustrious offspring of a glorious line.] According to the original, “Descended from the celebrated line of the Pushkarávarttakas," translated, in a prose version of this passage, “Diluvian Clouds:" see Colebrooke on Sanskrit and Prakrit Prosody, Asiatic Researches, Vol. X. Clouds, agreeably to the Brahmánda Purana, are divided into three classes, according to their origin from fire, the breath of Brahmá, or the wings of the mountains, which were cut off by Indra (uw). These latter are also called betra mi, being especially the receptacles of water. Thus, in the Purána Sarvaswa,
पुष्करा नाम ते मेघा वृहतस्तोयमत्सराः
पुष्करावर्तकास्तेन कारणे नेह शब्दिताः ॥ "The clouds called Pushkara are those large clouds which are insatiable of water; and,
on