________________

MEGHA DÚTA, OR
आकैलासाविसकिशलयच्छेदपाथेयवन्तस्सम्पत्स्यन्ते नभसि भवतो राजहंसास्महायाः ॥ ११ ॥
And when thy thunders soothe the parching earth, And showers, expected, raise her mushroom birth ; The Swans for mount Kailasa shall prepare, And track thy course attendant through the air.
76
ANNOTATIONS. always makes a prominent figure in the description of wet or cloudy weather. Thus in the rainy season of our author's (YGHETT) Rítu Sanhára,' or Assemblage of Seasons :
तृपाकुलैश्चातकपक्षिणां कुलैः प्रयाचितास्तोयभरावलसिनः । प्रयान्ति मन्दं नववारिधारिणो
वलाहकाः श्रोत्रमनोहरखनाः ॥ The thirsty Chátaka impatient eyes The promised waters of the labouring skies; Where heavy Clonds, with low but pleasing song,
In slow procession murmuring move along. The Chátaka is the Cuculus Melanoleucus. The term IT is rendered by the Commentators in general left,' on the left side ; but Ramanath Tarkalankára interprets it
beautiful'; and maintains that the cry of birds, to be auspicious, should be upon the right side, not upon the left. Bharata Mallika, however, cites astrological writers to prove that the Chátaka is one of the exceptions to this rule:
वहिणश्चातकाशापा ये च पुंसङ्गिताः खगाः।
मृगा वा वामगा दृष्टाः सैन्यसम्पबलप्रदाः ॥ “Peacocks, Chátakas, Cháshas (blue jays), and other male birds, occasionally also antelopes, "going cheerfully along the left, give good fortune to the host." The Greek notions agreed with those of Rámanát'h, and considered the flight of birds upon the right side to be auspicious : the Romans made it the left; but this difference arose from the situation of the observer, as in both cases the auspicious quarter was the east; the oiwvortóxos facing the north, and Aruspex the south. In general, according to the Hindus, those omens which occur upon the left side are unpropitious.
Verse 75. “The Rájahansas, desirous of going to the lake Mánasa, shall accompany thee " as far as Kailása, having laid in their provisions from the new shoots of the filaments of the " stalk of the lotus.” This is the closer reading of the text. Kailása is, properly speaking,
a mytho