________________

14
MEGHA DÚTA, OR
अद्रेः शृङ्गं वहति पवनः किंस्विदित्युन्मुखीभिदृष्टोच्छायश्चकितचकितं मुग्धसिद्धाङ्गनाभिः ॥ स्थानादस्मात् सरसनिचुलादुत्पतोदङ्मुखः खं
Rise from these streams, and seek the upper sky; Then to the north with daring pinions fly. The beauteous Sylphs shall mark thee with amaze, As backward bent thou strik'st their upward gaze, In doubt if by the gale abruptly torn, Some mountain-peak along the air is borne. The ponderous Elephants, who prop the skies, Shall view thy form expansive with surprise ;
2
ANNOTATIONS guished, the lord or master as it were, of the line of Raghu, an ancestor of that warrior, and himself a celebrated hero and sovereign. Ráma is hence also termed Rághava (ta), a regular derivative from Raghu, implying family descent. The exploits of the two heroes form the chief subject of another poem by our author, entitled Raghuvansa (yan), or The race of Raghu.
Verse 85. We now begin the geographical part of the poem; which, as far as it can be made out through the difference of ancient and modern appellations, seems to be very accurately conceived. The two extreme points of the Cloud's progress are, the vicinity of Nagpore, as mentioned in the note on Verse 1, and the niountain Kailasa, or rather the Himalaya range. During this course, the poet notices some of the most celebrated places, with the greater number of which we are still acquainted. In the first instance, we have here his direction due north from the mountain of Rámagiri; and we shall notice the other points as they occur.
Verse 87. Literally, the wives of the Siddhas. The Siddhas are originally human beings, but who, by devout abstraction, have attained superhuman powers, and a station apparently intermediate between men and gods. They tenat the upper regions of the air.
Verse 91. Each of the four quarters, and the four intermediate points of the compass, has, according to the Hindus, a regent or presiding deity. Each of these deities also has his male and female elephant. The names of them all are enumerated in the following verse of the Amara Kosha:
ऐरावतः