________________

16
MEGHA DÚTA, OR
त्वय्यायत्तं कृषिफल मिति भूविकारानभिः प्रीतिस्निग्धैर्जनपदवधूलोचनैः पीयमानः ॥ सद्यस्सीरोत्कषणसुरभिक्षेत्रमारुह्य मालं किञ्चित् पश्चाइज लघुगतिः किञ्चिदेवोतरेण ॥ १६ ॥
Thy fertile gifts, which looks of love reward, Where bright-eyed peasants tread the verdant sward. Thence sailing north, and veering to the west, On Ámrakúta's lofty ridges rest;
10+
ANNOTATIONS. places enumerated in the poem before us. The easterly progress of the Cloud, and the subsequent direction by which he is to reach the mountain Amrakúta, prove that the place here mentioned must be somewhere in the immediate vicinity of Ruttunpoor, the chief town of the northern half of the province of Cheteesger'h, and described in Captain Blunt's tour, Asiatic Researches, Vol. vii., and also in that of Mr. Colebrooke, published in the Asiatic Annual Register for 1806. The only modern traces that can be found of it are in a place called Malda, a little to the north of Ruttunpoor. In Ptolemy's map, there is a town called Maleta; and situated, with respect to the Vindhya mountains, similarly with the Mála of our poet. I should have supposed that the Mála mentioned from the geography of the Puranas by Mr. Wilford (Asiatic Researches, viii. 336) was the same with the place alluded to in the text of Kálidása: if, however, that gentleman is correct in applying the name to the Malbhoom of Midnapoor, it will be inuch further to the east than will do for our present purpose, and must be an entirely different place. There is little reason to think that either of these Málas are the country of the Malli, who are mentioned by Pliny; and who are more probably the same with the Marrol of Arrian, and the inhabitants, as is stated by Major Rennell, of the province of Multan. I
Verse 104. The course pointed out to the Cloud, and an allusion which follows to the vicinity of the Narmadá river, furnish us with reasons for supposing that the mountain here mentioned is that more commonly designated by the name of Omerkuntuk. The change of sound is not more violent than it is in a number of evident corruptions from the Sanskrit language, now current in the dialects of India. The term Ámrakúta means the Mango Peak, and refers to the abundance of mango-trees in the incumbent and surrounding forests. Should
this