________________

CLOUD MESSENGER.
19
स्थित्वा तस्मिन् वनचरवधूभुक्तकुळे मुहूर्त तोयोत्सीततरगतिस्तत्परं वन तीर्णः ॥
124
Thence journeying onwards, Vindhya's ridgy chain, And Reva's rill, that bathes its foot, attain; Whose slender streams upon the brown hill's side, Like painted streaks upon the dusky hide
ANNOTATIONS. Verse 123. The Vindhya range of mountains holds a very distinguished station both in the mythology and geography of Hindustan : these points are both discussed at some length in the tour from Mirzapore to Nagpore, already cited; and, as in those passages which I have been able to investigate I find a perfectly accurate statement, I shall here transcribe the words of its author.
“ Bind'h, in Sanskrit named Vind'hya, constitutes the limit between Hindustan and the Deccan. The most ancient Hindu authors assign it as the southern boundary of the region which they denominate Aryabhúma or Aryaverta. Modern authors, in like manner, make this the line which discriminates the northern from the southern nations of India. It reaches almost from the eastern to the western sea; and the highest part of the range deviates little from the line of the tropic. The mountainous tract, however, which retains the appellation, spreads much more widely: it meets the Ganges in several places towards the north ; and the Godáveri is held to be its southern limit.
"Sanskrit etymologists deduce its name from a circumstance to which I have just now alluded: it is called Bind'hya, says the author of a Commentary on the Amercosh, because people think (w 4for the progress of the sun is obstructed (at) by it. Suitably to this notion, the most elevated ridge of this tropical range of mountains is found to run from a point that lies between Chhota Nagpore and Palamu, to another that is situated in the vicinity of Ougein. But the course of the Nermadá river better indicates the direction of the principal range of the Vind’h hills. From Amracúta, where this river has its source, on the same spot with the Sone and the Hatsu, to the gulf of Cambaya, where it disembogues itself into the sea, the channel of the Nermadá is confined by a range of hills, or by a tract of elevated ground, in which numerous rivers take their rise; and by their subsequent course towards the Sone and Jamuna on one side, and towards the Tapti and Oodaver on the other, sufficiently indicate the superior elevation of that tract through which the Nermadá has forced its way. The vast extent of this mountainous tract, contrasted with the small elevation of these hills,
viewed