________________

20
MEGHA DÚTA, OR
रेवां द्रक्ष्यस्युपलविषमे विन्ध्यपादे विशीणों भक्तिच्छेदैरिव विरचितां भूतिमङ्गे गजस्य ॥ २० ॥ तस्यास्तिक्तैर्वनगजमदैवासितं वान्तवृष्टि
128
of the tall Elephant- in bright display, Through stones and rocks wind slow their arduous way. Here the soft dews thy path has lost resume, And sip the gelid current's rich perfume,
ANNOTATIONS. viewed from the plains of Hindustan, has furnished grounds for a legend to which the mythological writings of the Hindus often allude. Vind’hya having once prostrated himself before his spiritual guide, Agastya, still remains in that posture, by command of the holy personage. This humiliation is the punishment of his presumption, in emulating the lofty height of Himálaya and Meru. According to this legend, Vind’hya has one foot at Chunar; and hence the real name of that fortress is said to be Charanádri (reutfc): his other foot is, I think, placed by the same legend in the vicinity of Gayá: the vulgar, very inconsistently, suppose the head of the prostrate mountain near the temple of Vind’hya Vasini, four miles from Mirzapore."
Verse 124. The Revá is a name of the Narmadá river, which, as we have seen in the preceding note, rises from the mountain Amrakúta or Omerkuntuk. It may be here observed, that the rivers are always personified by the Hindus, and are, in general, female personifications. Thus we have Gangá, the daughter of Jahnu; Yamuna, the daughter of the Sun; and Revá, or Narmadá, the daughter of Himála, as is said in the hymn translated from the Váyu Purana, and given by Captain Blunt, Asiatic Researches vii. 103. The names of the Narmadá river are thus stated in the Amara Kosha,
रेवा तु नर्मदा सोमोद्भवा मेकलकन्यका "Reva, Nermadá, Sómódbhavá, and Mekala-Kanyaká;" which are explained by the best Commentators thus, “who flows, who delights, who is descended from the line of the moon, and who is the daughter of Mekala.” The last term is applied either to the Vindhya mountain, or is considered to be the name of a Rishi or saint, and progenitor of the river-goddess. Tradition has assigned to this river a very Ovidian kind of tale; which is related in Captain Blunt's tour, and which has been repeated in verse, with much elegance and spirit, by the author of the Metamorphosis of Sona.