________________

CLOUD MESSENGER.
21
र्जनकुञ्जप्रतिहतरयं तोयमादाय गच्छेः ॥ अन्तस्सारं घन तुलयितुं नानिलश्शक्ष्यति त्वां रिक्तस्सर्वो भवति हि लघुः पूर्णतागौरवाय ॥ २१ ॥
132
Where the wild Elephant delights to shed The juice exuding fragrant from his head. Then swift proceed, nor shall the blast have force To check with empty gusts thy ponderous course.
ANNOTATIONS. Verse 131. The juice exuding fragrant from his head.] It is rather extraordinary that this juice which exudes from the temples of the elephant, especially in the season of rut, should have been unnoticed by modern writers on natural history, until the time of Cuvier (Regne animal), although mention of it is made by Strabo, from Megasthenes. The author of the Wild Sports of the East states, that “on each side of the elephant's temples there is an aperture about the size of a pin's head, whence an ichor exudes;” but he does not appear to have been aware of its nature. Indeed his descriptions, though entertaining, are frequently defective, owing to his extreme ignorance of the languages, the literature of which he so liberally devotes to the flames. In the Amara Kosha, this fluid is termed Hf: and FTSH; and the elephant, while it flows, is distinguished by the terms oforai, affa: : from the animal out of rut, or after the juice has ceased to exude, and which is then called : or fag:. All these names are expressive of the circumstances. The exudation and fragrance of this fluid is frequently alluded to in Sanskrit poetry. Its scent is commonly compared to the odour of the sweetest flowers, and is then supposed to deceive and attract the bees. These circumstances occur in this passage from a work already referred to, the Rītu Sanhára :
वनहिपानां नवतोयदखनैमैदान्वितानां खनतां मुहुर्मुहुः । कपोलदेशा विमलोत्पलप्रभा
स्सभङ्गयूथैमेदवारिभिः श्रिताः ॥ Roars the wild Elephant inflamed with love, And the deep sound reverberates from above; His ample front, like some rich lotus, shews Where sport the bees, and fragrant moisture flows.