________________

24
MEGHA DUTA, OR
पाण्डुच्छायोपवनवृतयः केतकैस्सूचिभिन्नैनीडारम्भे गृहबलिभुजामाकुलग्रामचैत्याः ॥ त्वय्यासन्ने फलपरिणतिश्यामजबूवनान्ता
Lo! where awhile the Swans reluctant cower, Dasárna's fields await the coming shower. Then shall their groves diffuse profounder gloom, And brighter buds the deepening shade illume; Then shall the ancient tree, whose branches wear The marks of village reverence and care,
156
ANNOTATIONS.
Verse 154. Dasárna's fields await the coming shower.] No traces of this name are to be found in modern maps: it is enumerated in Major Wilford's lists from the Puranas, Asiatic Researches, vol. viii. amongst the countries situated behind the Vindhya mountains; and corresponds, according to him, with the Dosarene of Ptolemy and the Periplus. Ptolemy's map has also a Dosara and Dosaronis Fluvium; and in the Pauranik list of rivers, there is also a Dosarna river, which is said to rise from the mountain Chitrakúta. It may possibly correspond, at least in part, with the modern district of Cheteesger’h, as the etymology of both words refers to similar circumstances. Cheteesger'h is so named from its being supposed to comprise Thirty-six forts; and according to Bharata, the Commentator on our text, Daśárna is derived from Daša (ET) Ten, and Rina (PU), a strong hold or Durga, the Droog of the Peninsula, and thence means the district of the Ten citadels.
Verse 157. Then shall the ancient tree, &c.] A number of trees receive particular veneration from the Hindus; as the Indian fig, the Holy fig-tree, the Myrobalan trees, &c. In most villages there is at least one of these, which is considered particularly sacred, and is carefully kept and watered by the villagers, is hung occasionally with garlands, and receives the Pranám or veneratory inclination of the head, or even offerings and libations. The birds mentioned in the text by the epithet af are the Vakas or Cranes. The term signifies " who eats the food of his female;" TE commonly a house, meaning, in this compound, a wife. At the season of pairing, it is said that the female of this bird assists in feeding the male ; and the same circumstance is stated with respect to the crow and the sparrow, whence the same epithet is applied to them also.