________________

MEGHA DUTA, OR
यः पण्यस्त्रीरतिपरिमलोद्गारिभिनागराणामुद्दामानि प्रथयति शिलावेश्मभिर्यौवनानि ॥ २७ ॥ विश्रान्तस्मन् व्रज नगनदीतीरजातानि सिञ्च
While sweeter fragrance breathes from each recess, Than rich perfumes the hireling wanton's dress. On Naga Nadi's banks thy waters shed, And raise the feeble jasmin's languid head ;
172
ANNOTATIONS. Verse 167. Next o'er the lesser hills thy flight suspend.] The term in the text, aire fofi, is explained by the Commentators, to signify either the hill named Níchais, a mountainous range, of little note, or of little elevation. It is of no great moment; but perhaps the latter, which meaning we select, is the most satisfactory.
Verse 168. And growth erect to drooping flowerets lend.] This passage, more literally rendered, is, " That hill which with upright flowers is like the body with its hair on end." The erection of the hairs of the body is, with the Hindus, constantly supposed to be the effect of pleasure or delight.
Verse 171. On Naga Nadi's banks.] Some of the Commentators notice various readings of the name of this river ; which occurs as given in the translation, Naga Nadí (araçi), the mountain stream ;' Nava Nadí (1991), the new river;' and Vana Nadí (779CI), the forest river. It is probably one amongst a number of small streams falling from the Vindhya range of hills; and, indeed, the whole province of Malwa abounds in water; so that, as is stated in the Ayeen Akbery, "you cannot travel two or three cose without meeting with streams of good water, whose banks are shaded by the wild-willow and other trees, and decorated with the hyacinth and other beautiful and odoriferous flowers." Gladwin's Translation, vol. i.I have given the preference to the Naga Nadí as above, from finding a river west of the Betwah, which we have crossed, named the Parbatty; and which, rising in the Vindhya chain, runs north-west, till it joins another called, in Arrowsmith's Map, the Sepra; and the two together fall into the Chumbul. The word Parbatty, or Párvatí, means, 'sprung from the mountains;' and Naga Nadí, as I have mentioned, bears a similar import; so that they possibly are synonyms of the same stream.