________________

30
MEGHA DUTA, OR
पूर्वोद्दिष्टामनुसर पुरीं श्रीविशालां विशालाम् ॥ स्वल्पीभते सुचरितफले स्वर्गिणां गां गतानां शेषैः पुण्यैर्हतमिव दिवः कान्तिमत् खण्डमेकम् ॥ ३२ ॥
200
Renowned for deeds that worth and love inspire, And bards to paint them with poetic fire; The fairest portion of celestial birth, Of Indra's paradise transferred to earth; The last reward to acts of virtue given ; The only recompence then left to Heaven.
204
ANNOTATIONS. Verse 199. Renowned for deeds &c.] I have here taken some liberty with the text, the literal translation of which is a famous for the story of Udayana, and the number of its learned men.” The story of Udayana, or Vatsarája, as he is also named, is thus told concisely, by the Commentators on the poem :-Pradyota was a sovereign of Oujein, who had a daughter named Vásavadattá, and whom he intended to bestow in marriage upon a king of the name of Sanjaya. In the mean time, the princess sees the figure of Vatsarája, sovereign of Kusha Dwipa, in a dream, and becomes enamoured of him. She contrives to inform him of her love, and he carries her off from her father and his rival. The same story is alluded to in the Málati Madhava, a drama by Bhavabhúti; but neither in that, nor in the Commentary on the Megha Dúta, is mention made of the author, or of the work in which it is related. Mr. Colebrooke, in his learned Essay on Sanskrit and Prakrit Prosody, in the Tenth Volume of the Asiatic Researches, has stated, that the allusion by Bhavabhúti was unsupported by other authority; not having, perhaps, noticed the similar allusion in this poem. He has also given an abstract of the Vásavadattá of Subandhu; a tale which corresponds, in many points, with that of Udayana, as here explained. Udayana is also the hero of part of the Katha Sarit Sagara; and his marriage with Vásavadattá is there related in nearly a similar manner as that just described. The story was evidently popular; and the text might be rendered Ujjayin, “great or illustrious by the number of those skilled in the tale of Udayana.”
Verse 204. The only recompence then left to Heaven.] To understand this properly, it is necessary to be acquainted with some of the Hindu notions regarding a future state. The
highest