________________

CLOUD MESSENGER.
31
दीर्थीकुर्वन् पटुमदकलं कूजितं सारसानां प्रत्यूषेषु स्फुटितकमलामोदमैत्रीकषायः ॥
Here, as the early Zephyrs waft along, In swelling harmony, the woodland song ; They scatter sweetness from the fragrant flower That joyful opens to the morning hour.
208
ANNOTATIONS. highest kind of happiness is absorption into the divine essence, or the return of that portion of spirit which is combined with the attributes of humanity, to its original source. This happiness, according to the philosopher, is to be attained only by the most perfect abstraction from the world, and freedom from passion, even while in a state of terrestrial existence : but there are certain places, which, in the popular creed, are invested with so much sanctity, as to entitle all who die within their precincts to final absorption or annihilation. One of these is Oujein, or Avanti; and they are all enumerated in this verse :
अयोध्या मथुरा माया काशी काञ्ची अवनिका।
पुरी द्वारावती चैव सनता मोक्षदायिकाः ॥ "Ayodhyá, Mathura, Máyá, Káśí, Kánchí, Avantiká, and the city Dwárávatí, are the seven " places which grant eternal happiness.”
Besides this ultimate felicity, the Hindus have several minor degrees of happiness; amongst which is the enjoyment of Indra's Swarga, or, in fact, of a Muhammadan paradise. The degree and duration of the pleasures of this paradise are proportioned to the merits of those admitted to it; and “they, who have enjoyed this lofty region of Swarga, but whose virtue is exhausted, revisit the habitation of mortals.” The case now alluded to seems, however, to be something different from that so described by Sir William Jones. It appears, by the explanation of the Commentators, that the exhausted pleasures of Swarga had proved insufficient for the recompence of certain acts of austerity, which, however, were not such as to merit final emancipation: the divine persons had therefore to seek elsewhere for the balance of their reward; and for that purpose they returned to Earth, bringing with them the fairest portion of Swarga, in which they continued to live in the discharge of pious duties till the whole account was settled, and their liberated spirits were re-united with the great, uniform, and primeval essence. The portion of Swarga thus brought to Earth was the city Avanti; whose superior sanctity and divine privileges are here alluded to, and thus explained by the poet.