________________

MEGHA DUTA, OR
आराध्यैनं शरवनभवं देवमुल्लवितावा सिद्धबन्दैजलकणभयाहीणिभिर्दतमार्गः ॥ व्यालम्बेथास्सुरभितनयालम्भजां मानयिष्यन् स्रोतोमूल् भुवि परिणतां रन्तिदेवस्य कीर्तिम् ॥ ४७ ॥
308
To him whose youth in Sara thickets strayed, Reared by the nymphs, thy adoration paid, Resume thy road, and to the world proclaim The glorious tale of Rantideva's fame, Sprung from the blood of countless oxen shed, And a fair river through the regions spread.
312
ANNOTATIONS. Verse 305 &c. Whose moulting plumes, to love maternal dear.] Skanda, or Kartikeya, is represented mounted upon a peacock; and Bhaváni we have already seen is the wife of Siva, and half-mother to this deity. We have also noticed the frequency of the allusion to the delight the peacock is supposed to feel upon the appearance of cloudy and rainy weather.
Verse 310. Rantideva is the son of Sankriti, and sixth in descent from Bharata. Vishnu Purána, p. 450.
Verse 311. Sprung from the blood of countless oxen shed.] The sacrifice of the horse or of the cow, the day or Yahy, appears to have been common in the earliest periods of the Hindu ritual. It has been conceived that the sacrifice was not real, but typical; and that the form of sacrificing only was performed upon the victim, after which it was sct at liberty. The text of this passage, however, is unfavourable to such a notion, as the metamorphosis of the blood of the kine into a river certainly implies that blood was diffused. The expression of the original, literally rendered, is, “sprung from the blood of the daughters of Surabhi,” that is, 'kine;' Surabhi being a celebrated cow produced at the churning of the ocean, and famed for granting to her votaries whatever they desired. “Daughter of Surabhi” is an expression of common occurrence, to denote the cow.
Verse 312. And a fair river through the regions spread.] The name of this river is not mentioned in the text of the poem, but is said by the Commentators to be the Charmanvatí; and such a name occurs in Major Wilford's lists, from the Puránas, amongst those streams which seem to arise from the north-west portion of the Vindhya mountains. The modern
appellation