________________

CLOUD MESSENGER.
49
मन्तःशुद्धस्त्वमपि भविता वर्णमात्रेण कृष्णः ॥ ५१॥ तस्माद्गछेरनुकनखलं शैलराजावतीणों
344
No longer quaffed the wine cup with his wife, But mourned in solitude o'er kindred strife. Thy journey next o'er Kanakhala bends, Where Jahnu's daughter from the hills descends ;
ANNOTATIONS. employed as bills were formerly used, for pulling his enemies down from their horses, &c., which enabled him then to dispatch them with his club. Although Krishna took an active part in the warfare between the Kurus and Pándus, Balarama refused to join either party; and retired into voluntary seclusion, filled with grief at the nature of the contest : deserting,' the poet says, ' his favourite liquor marked by the eyes of Revatí;'--that is, emulating their brightness as she shared the revels of her husband. Vishnu Purána, p. 510,604.
Verse 345. The name is Kalakhala in the original, but it more properly is as given above. The meaning of the word, agreeably to a forced etymology, is thus explained in the Gangadwara Mahatmya section of the Skanda Purana :
खलः को नात्र मुक्तिं वै भजते तत्र मज्जनात् ।
अतः कनखलं तीथे नाना चक्रुर्मुनीश्वराः ॥ " What man (.) so wicked (a) as not to obtain (a) future happiness from bathing there? Thence the holy sages have called this Tírtha, by the name of Kanak hala.” It also occurs in this passage of the Hari Vanša portion of the Mahábhárata :
गङ्गाहारं कनखलं सोमो वै यत्र संस्थितः ॥
“Gangádwara, Kanakhala, and where the moon impends :" and, in both instances, is applied to the place where the Ganges descends into the low ground of Hindustán. The name is still retained ; as appears from the testimony of an impartial witness, Lieut. Webb, in his Survey of the Sources of the Ganges; a survey which has essentially improved the geography of those regions :-“ The party arrived at Haridwara, and encamped at the village of Kanakhala” (Kankhal), on the west bank of the Ganges, at the distance of about two miles from the fair.” Asiatic Researches, xi. 419. The Ganges does not now descend at Kankhal; and it is a question for geologists to solve, whether the Ganges
has,