________________

50
MEGHA DÚTA, OR
जहोः कन्यां सगरतनयस्वर्गसोपानपतिम् ॥
Whose sacred waters, to Bhagirath given, Conveyed the sons of Sagara to heaven.
348
ANNOTATIONS. has, in the course of nineteen centuries, so corroded the skirts of the mountain, as to have thrown back the gorge through which she passes, a distance of two miles. See note on a view of Kankhal, Oriental Portfolio.
Verse 346. Where Jahnu's daughter from the hills descends.] Jahnu's daughter is Gangá, or the Ganges; which river, “after forcing its way through an extensive tract of mountainous country, here first enters on the plains.” It is rather extraordinary that Kálidása should have omitted the name of Haridwara (Hurdwar), and preferred Kanakhala, especially as the former occurs in the Puranas, in the Skanda Purána, as mentioned in the note, page 450, vol. xi. of the Researches; and in this passage from the Matsya Puráńa, cited in the Purána Sarvaswa :
सर्वत्र सुलभा गङ्गा त्रिषु स्थानेषु दुर्लभा ।
हरिद्वारे प्रयागे च गङ्गासागरसङ्गमे ॥ "The Ganges is everywhere easy of access, except in three places, Haridwara, Prayaga, and her junction with the sea." Jahnu is the name of a sage, who, upon being disturbed in his devotions by the passage of the river, drank up its waters. Upon relenting, however, he allowed the stream to re-issue from his ear; and the affinity of Ganga to the saint arises from this second birth.
Verse 348. Conveyed the sons of Sagara to heaven.] The Ganges, according to the legend, was brought from heaven, by the religious rites of Bhagiratha, the great-grandson of Sagar; who, as well as that king, had engaged in a long series of acts of austerity, for the purpose of procuring the descent of the river to wash the ashes of Sagar's 60,000 sons. The youths had been reduced to this state by the indignation of Kapila, a saint, whose devotions they had disturbed in their eager quest of the horse that was to be the victim of an Aswamedha by their father. Their misfortunes did not, however, cease with their existence; as their admission to Swarga depended, according to the instructions of Garuda, upon the use of the water of the Ganges in the administration of their funeral rites. At this period the Ganges watered the plains of heaven alone; and it was no easy undertaking to induce her to resign those for an humble and earthly course. Sagara, his son Ansuman, and grandson Dilípa, died without being able to effect the descent of the heavenly stream: but his greatgrandson, Bhagiratha, was more fortunate; and his long-continued austerities were rewarded
by