________________

58
MEGHA DÚTA, OR
हंसदारं भुगपतियशोवर्म यत्क्रौञ्चन्धम् ॥ तेनोदीची दिशमनुसरेस्तिर्यगायामशोभी JUTA: Uret af FUTHAT EART faout: il ve il
396
That pass the swans in annual flight explore ; And erst a Hero's mighty arrows tore. Winding thy way due north through the defile, Thy form compressed, with borrowed grace shall smile : The sable foot that Bali marked with dread, A god triumphant o'er creation spread.
400
ANNOTATIONS. Verse 396. And erst a Hero's mighty arrows tore.] The Krauncha pass, or defile, in the Krauncha niountain, is said to have been made by the arrows of Blirigupati, or Parasurama, who was educated by Siva on Mount Kailasa, and who thus opened himself a passage from the mountains upon the occasion of his travelling southwards to destroy the Kshatriya or military race. Parasurama is an Avatár, or descent of Vishnu, in the person of the son of the Saint Jamadagni; and tliis Saint being also descended from the celebrated sage Bhộigu, liis son is named Bhrigupati, or, Chief of that race. See Legend of Parasuráma, Vishnu Purána, p. 401. The fissure in the Krauncha mountain is, in the Váyu and Vamana Puranas, ascribed to Kartikeya. Ibid, p. 169, note 10.
Verse 399. The sable foot that Bali marked with dread.] The story of Bali and the Vámana, or dwarf Avatár, was first told by Sonnerat, and has since been frequently repeated. As the former is a good specimen of the style in which Hindu legends were narrated by European travellers in the last century, it may be here inserted. “The fifth incarnation was in a Bramin dwarf, under the name of Vamen : it was wrought to restrain the pride of the giant Bely. The latter, after having conquered the gods, expelled them from Sorgon: he was generous, true to his word, compassionate, and charitable. Vichenou, under the form of a very little Bramin, presented himself before him while he was sacrificing, and asked him for three paces of land to build a hut. Bely ridiculed the apparent imbecility of the dwarf, in telling him that he ought not to limit his demand to a bequest so trifling ;--that his generosity could bestow a much larger donation of land. Vamen answered, that being of so small a stature, what he asked was more than sufficient. The prince immediately granted his request;
and,