________________

CLOUD MESSENGER.
59
गत्वा चोई दशमुखभुजोच्छ्रासितप्रस्थसन्धेः
Ascended thence, a transient period rest, Renowned Kailasa's venerated guest.
ANNOTATIONS. and, to ratify his donation, poured water into his right hand; which was no sooner done, than the dwarf grew so prodigiously, that his body filled the universe! He measured the earth with one pace, and the heavens with another; and then summoned Bely to give him his word for the third. The prince then recognised Vichenou, adored him, and presented his head to him : but the god, satisfied with his submission, sent him to govern the Pandalon; and permitted him to return every year to the earth, the day of the full moon, in the month of November."
SONNERAT'Voyages in the East Indies, Calcutta edition, vol. I. p. 22. Verse 402. Kailasa's venerated guest.] Kailasa, as it here appears, a part of the Himalaya range, is in fable a mountain of costly gems or of crystal, the site of Kuvera's capital, and the favourite haunt of Siva. I shall borrow, from the notes to Southey's Curse of Keliáma,' a description of it from Baldæus, curious enough in itself, but still more so for its strange medley of accuracy and incorrectness, and its uncouth transformation and commixture of the Sanskrit names. “The residence of Ixora (Iswara or A is upon the silver mount Kalaja (Kailasa or METE), to the south of the famous mountain Mahameru, being a most delicious place, planted with all sorts of trees, that bear fruit all the year round. The roses and other flowers send forth a most odoriferous scent; and the pond at the foot of the mount is enclosed with pleasant walks of trees, that afford an agreeable shade; whilst the peacocks and divers other birds entertain the ear with their harmonious noise, as the beautiful women do the eyes. The circumjacent woods are inhabited by a certain people called Munis or Rixis (Rishis or yra), who, avoiding the conversation of others, spend their time in offering daily sacrifices to their god.
"It is observable, that though these Pagans are generally black themselves, they do represent these Rixis to be of a fair complexion, with long white beards, and long garments hanging cross-ways, from about the neck down over the breast. They are in such high esteem among them, that they believe whom they bless are blessed, and whom they curse are cursed.
“Within the mountain lives another generation, called Jexaquinnera (Yaksha or Ta, and Kinnara or fcher), and Quendra (Indra or ), who are free from all trouble, and spend their days in continual contemplation, praises, and prayers to god. Round about the mountain stand seven ladders, by which you ascend to a spacious plain, in the middle whereof is a bell
of