________________

60
MEGHA DÚTA, OR
कैलासस्य त्रिदशवनितादर्पणस्यातिथिः स्याः ॥ तुङ्गोच्छायैः कुमुदविशदैो वितत्य स्थितः खं राशीभूतः प्रतिदिशमिव यम्बकस्याट्टहासः ॥ ६०॥
404
That mount, whose sides with brightest lustre shine, A polished mirror, worthy charms divine ; Whose base a Rávan from its centre wrung, Shaken, not sundered, stable though unstrung; Whose lofty peaks to distant realms in sight Present a Siva's smile, a lotus white.
408
ANNOTATIONS. of silver and a square table, surrounded with nine precious stones of divers colours: upon this table lies a silver rose, called Tamarapua(?), which contains two women as bright and fair as a pearl: one is called Brigasiri (?), i.e. The lady of the mouth;' the other Tarasiri (?), i.e.
The lady of the tongue :' because they praise God with the mouth and tongue. In the centre of this rose is the triangle of Quivelinga (Siva-linga); which, they say, is the permanent residence of God.” BALDÆUS. The latter part of this description is quite new to the Pandits, and I suspect is rather Mohammedan than Hindu. Little is said of Kailasa in authentic Hindu legend. See Vishnu Purána, p. 172.
Verse 406. Shaken, not sundered, stable though unstrung.] This alludes to a legend of Rávana's having attempted to remove the mountain from its situation; although he did not succeed as well as Satan and his compeers, when,
“From their foundations loosening to and fro,
They plucked the seated hills.” He considerably unhinged its foundations. The story perhaps originates with the curious vibrating rock at Mahabalipuram; of which it may be said, as is observed by Selden of Mainamber, i.e. Ambrose's stone in Cornwall, not far from Penzance, that “it is so great, that many men's united strength cannot remove it, yet with one finger you may wag it.”
Verse 407. Whose lofty peaks to distant realms in sight.] The lofty peaks of the Himalaya range of mountains are very justly stated by the poet to be visible to surrounding regions (ufagyta). They are seen in the south, from situations more remote than those in which any other peaks have been discerned; and the supposition of their exceeding even the Andes in elevation has been confirmed by recent inquiries.