________________

CLOUD MESSENGER.
उत्पश्यामि त्वयि तटगते स्निग्धभिन्नाञ्जनाभे सद्यःकृतद्विरददशनच्छेदगौरस्य तस्य ॥ शोभामरेः स्तिमितनयनप्रेक्षणीयां भवित्रीमंशन्यस्ते सति हलभूतो मेचके वाससीव ॥६१॥
And lo! those peaks, than ivory more clear, When yet unstained the parted tusks appear, Beam with new lustre, as around their head Thy glossy glooms metallic darkness spread; As shews a Halabhrīta's sable vest, More fair the pallid beauty of his breast.
- 412
ANNOTATIONS. Verse 412. Thy glossy glooms metallic darkness spread.] The expression in the original (fppuforstan ) may be rendered, “ shining like glossy powdered antimony," a preparation used for darkening the eye-lashes or the edges of the eye-lids, a practice common to the females of the East. It is also explained to mean merely, “ black divided antimony;" and the shining greyish-blue of the sulphuret of antimony, the substance alluded to, may often be observed in the hue of heavy clouds.
Verse 413. Halabhțita is a name of Balarama; and implies, as has been before explained, his use of a ploughshare as a weapon. He is represented of a white colour, clothed in a darkblue vest; and is thus alluded to in the introduction to the Gita Govinda of Jayadeva:
वहसि वपुषि विशदे वसनं जलदाभं हलहतिभीतिमिलितयमुनाभम् ॥
केशव धृतहलधररूप जय जगदीश हरे॥ Thus translated by Sir William Jones, in his Essay on the Chronology of the Hindus: “Thou “ bearest on thy bright body a mantle shining like a blue Cloud, or like the water of the " Yamuna tripping towards thee through fear of thy furrowing ploughshare, O Cesava ! " assuming the form of Balarama, be victorious O Heri! Lord of the Universe."
Verse 416. In sport may Gauri with her Siva stray.] I have already noticed that these mountains are the scene of Siva's loves and sports: they may still be considered as his favourite haunts, for some traces of him seem to start up in every direction amongst them. See thie late Travels to the Source of the Ganges, and Col. Hardwicke's Tour to Sirinagur.