________________

74
MEGHA DÚTA, OR
एभिस्साधो हृदयनिहितैर्लक्षणैर्लक्षयेथाः द्वारोपान्ते लिखितवपुषौ शङ्खपद्मौ च दृष्ट्वा ॥
532
These be thy guides—and faithfully preserve The marks I give thee: or e'en more, observe, Where painted emblems holy wealth design, Kuvera's treasures—that abode is mine.
ANNOTATIONS. Ver. 534. Kuvera's treasures.] Thick with sparkling oriental gems The portal shone.
Paradise Lost, B. iii. 507. For such Kuvera's nine treasures are sometimes supposed to be. Rámásrama, commenting upon Amara, thus enumerates them, from the Sabdárnava:
पद्मो स्त्रियां महापद्मः शङ्को मकरकच्छपौ ।
मुकुन्दनन्दनीलाच खर्वश्च निधयो नव ॥ "The Padma, Mahápadma, Sankha, Makara, Kachhapa, Mukunda, Nanda, Níla, and Kharva, are the nine Nidhis.” The Sabda Ratnávali also has the same reading. In Hemachandra, and the Sabda Mála, fie is substituted for the Nidhi (faru) is the generic name; but how it should be rendered into English, I am not prepared to say. Mr. Colebrooke calls the particular Nidhis, “auriferous gems.' See his translation of the Amara Kosha. Some of the words bear the meanings of precious or holy things: thus, Padma is the Lotus; Sankha the shell or conch. Again, some of them imply large numbers; thus, Padma is 10,000 millions, and Mahápadma is 100,000 millions, &c.; but all of them are not received in either the one or the other acceptation. We may translate almost all into things: thus, a lotus, a large lotus, a shell, a certain fish, a tortoise, a crest, a mathematical figure used by the Jainas. Níla refers only to colour; but Kharva, the ninth, means a dwarf. Mr. Kindersley, translating through the medium of the Tamul, has called eight of Kuvera's gems, the coral, pearl, cat'seye, emerald, diamond, sapphire, ruby, and topaz. The ninth he leaves un determined. In Dr. Hunter's Dictionary, I find one only of the nine in the Hindoostanee Language,
p or wo J. Neelum or Neelmun, derived from a safu a blue gem,' and interpreted the Sapphire. TMT, Padma-colour, means a Ruby; and possibly the Padma may be the same : perhaps tres y, the tortoise, means tortoise-shell; and Makara may be an error for Maraka or Marakata, an Emerald, or it may imply the same stone from the green colour of a fish: these, however, are mcre conjectures. Agreeably to the system of the Tantrikas, the Nidhis are
personified,