________________

76
MEGHA DÚTA, OR
तन्वी श्यामा शिखरदशना पक्वविम्बाधरोष्ठी
There, in the fane, a beauteous creature stands, The first best work of the Creator's hands;
548
ANNOTATIONS. produced by it on different persons and at different periods. Moore, meeting with it in America, writes some elegant stanzas on the subject; and adds to the lightness of his verse, the solidity of prose in the authority of this note :—"The lively and varying illumination with which these fire-flies light up the woods at night gives quite an idea of enchantment. Puis ces mouches se developpant de l'obscurité de ces arbres, et s'approchant de nous, nous les voyions sur les orangers voisins, qu'ils mettoient tout en feu, nous rendant la vue de leurs beaux fruits, que la nuit avoit ravie, &c.--L'Histoire Des Antilles." See Moore's Odes and Epistles. We have now to hear the description of a Traveller of 1672, the learned and very devout Johannes Fryer, M.D.
“The next day, at twelve o'clock at noon, we struck into our old road at Moorbar, from whence, before, we were misguided : we packed hence by five in the afternoon, and left our burnt wood on the right-hand; but entered another, which made us better sport, deluding us with false flashes, that you would have thought the trees on a flame, and presently, as if untouched by fire, they retained their wonted verdure. The Coolies beheld the sight with horror and amazement, and were consulting to set ine down and shift for themselves; whereof being informed, I cut two or three with my sword, and, by breathing a vein, let Shitan (the Devil) out, who was crept into their fancies; and led them, as they do a startling jade, to smell to what their wall-eyes represented amiss; where we found an host of flies, the subject both of our fear and wonder, which the sultry heat and moisture had generated into being, the certain prodromus of the ensuing rain, which followed us from the hills. This gave my thoughts the contemplation of that miraculous bush crowned with innocent flames that gave to Moses so pleasant and awful a prospect; the fire, that consumes every thing, seeming rather to dress than offend it."
Verse 518. The first best work of the Creator's hands.] Literally, the first creation of Brahma: and 'first may refer to time, or to degree: it most probably here means 'best.' So Milton, speaking of Eve :
"Oh, Fairest of creation ! last and best Of all God's works.”
Paradise Lost, B. ix. 896. We now enter upon perhaps the most pleasing part of this elegant little poem, the description of the Yaksha's wife. I may perhaps come under the denomination of those who, according