________________

SO
MEGHA DÚTA, OR
मत्सादृश्यं विरहतनुताभावगम्यं लिखन्ती ॥ पृच्छन्ती वा मधुरवचनां सारिका पञ्जरस्थां कच्चिद्भर्तुः स्मरसि निभृते त्वं हि तस्य प्रियेति ॥ ४ ॥
568
I mark her now with Fancy's aid retrace This wasted figure and this haggard face. Now from her favourite bird she seeks relief, And tells the tuneful Sáriká her grief ; Mourns o’er the feather'd prisoner's kindred fate, And fondly questions of its absent mate.
572
ANNOTATIONS. The Commentators, however, are not agreed how to interpret this passage in the original text, afgaat nor the expression founfa , "She falls before thee " they seem, however, to conceive it means, that the approach of the Cloud reminding her of its being the period at which absent husbands usually return home, she recollects that the return of her own lord is proscribed; and therefore either falls in a swoon, or with excess of affliction. The sacrifice is to be performed to render the gods propitious, or it is a sacrifice called therfos, usually performed by women at the beginning of the rainy season. Some interpret g7" In the city," not "Before, in front."
Verse 570. The Sáriká (Grakula religiosa) is a small bird, better known by the name of Maina. It is represented as a female, while the parrot is described as a male bird: and as these two have, in all Hindu tales, the faculty of human speech, they are constantly introduced, the one inveighing against the faults of the male sex, and the other exposing the defects of the female. They are thus represented in the fourth story of that entertaining collection, the Buetal Pucheesee:
मैना बोली कि पुरुष अधर्मी पापी दगाबाज़ स्त्रीहत्या करने बाले होते है । यिह सुनकर तोते ने कहा कि नारी भी दगाबाज़ झूठी बेवकुफ लालची हत्यारी होती है।
Ladies have always been distinguished for maintaining pet animals; and the fancy seems to have been equally prevalent in the East and West, and in ancient or modern times. The Swallow of Lesbia, 'Passer deliciæ meæ puellæ,' may rival the Sárika of the wife of the Yaksha, and Bullfinch of Mrs. Throckmorton. See Cowper's Poems.